[Music]
in my work i often have people saying to
me things like you know i just wish the
stress would go away or i don't want to
feel angry i don't want to feel
disappointed
and i said to them you know these kind
of goals are dead people's goals
only dead people
never get stressed never feel the
disappointment that comes with failure
never have their hearts broken you know
discomfort
is the price of admission to a
meaningful life
hey everybody welcome to impact theory
today's guest is susan david she's an
award-winning harvard medical school
psychologist and number one wall street
journal best-selling author thinkers50
named her to their list of the top
management thinkers in the world and
harvard business review singled out her
concept of emotional agility as one of
their management ideas of the year her
ted talk on the subject also went
insanely viral garnering over one
million views in its first week alone
and her ability to help people navigate
the often brutally difficult internal
struggles of living in the modern world
have made her one of the most sought
after speakers on the planet susan thank
you so much for joining me today
i am delighted to be with you
it's uh i think this topic is super
important it's really intriguing i love
the way that you've
come into it and i think the best place
to start with you is to understand the
concept of emotions are data but they're
not directives i thought that was so
powerful what do you mean by that
well what i mean is we live in a society
that often has this narrative that
emotions are bad
that emotions need to be controlled we
need to think positive all the time and
if you feel
bad if you're having a bad day if you
feel anxious or frustrated or even if
you're grieving that those emotions are
somehow negative and they need to be
then pushed aside because they're going
to get in the way of our success
and what i suggest is the opposite which
is that our emotions have evolved
to help us to adapt and to thrive
and if we can just be more effective
with them understanding the data that
they bring
we can
move forward effectively so what do i
mean by data what i mean is that our
emotions they might not feel good
when they are the things that i spoke
about previously anxiety and so on
um but that our emotions contain
information about the things that we
care about
if you board at work that border might
be a signal that you value learning and
that there isn't enough of it in your
life right now
or if you feel guilty as a parent
that guilt might be a signal that you
value presence and connectedness and you
don't have enough of it
so
when we try to understand the emotions
that are being
uh
that are there and the the values that
are being signaled by those emotions it
actually helps us to adapt so that's the
data part the not directives part
is that of course just because i feel
bored doesn't mean i need to go give
notice right now
and because i feel guilty as a parent
doesn't mean that i am a bad parent
we need to as human beings be able to
have the
skills these are critical skills in
complex challenging times the skills to
connect with ourselves in ways that help
us to be our best and
so data and not directives is one idea
that helps us to bring ourselves forward
one of the things i've always attributed
my own success as an entrepreneur to is
my ability to self-soothe and when i
watch other people and i try to assess
what's holding them back a lot of times
it's the story that they're telling
themselves so they'll get a piece of
harsh criticism and they think that
makes them bad like you were saying
about feeling guilty about being a
parent doesn't mean you are a bad parent
but somebody would get harsh feedback
they would shut down the psychological
immune system kicks in to make them feel
better about themselves they reject the
feedback and they're never able to
progress and so your concept of
emotional agility really being around
that internal narrative i think is
incredibly powerful
it's really important you know my work
is really as a psychologist and the core
of my work
for literally two to three decades now
has been focused on a single question
and that question is what does it take
internally in the way we deal with our
thoughts our emotions and our stories
that help us thrive in the world
because we know that how we come to our
inner worlds our thoughts our emotions
and our stories
this drives everything it drives how we
come to our relationships
how we love how we live
what careers we put our hands up for how
we parent and how we lead and you know
so much of the
focus on success is about extrinsic
factors you know um what are your goals
and what are the things that are outside
of you but really if we don't get this
internal part of ourselves
in sync and feeling integrated and
aligned and values connected
the rest can't happen and so really
that's the focus of my work and it's
both about how do you
um
how do you experience the value that our
emotions and our thoughts bring
but also how do we prevent ourselves
from getting stuck in them because as
you say you know we can have a thought
the thought might be i'm not good enough
the emotion might be something like i
feel really stressed
or the story some of our stories were
written on our mental chalkboards in
grade three you know stories about who
we are what kind of love we deserve
whether we're creative not creative
whether we're business people or not
and those stories can hook us and
no matter what 90-day plan we've got on
our wall in front of our desk
it's that stuff that can hold us back
and so really the focus of my work is
how do we begin to
move away from these thoughts emotions
and stories so that we feel more
connected and we can bring who we want
to be forward
yeah i want to dive into the process on
that because so you talk about this
stuff getting written into our
chalkboard when we're a little kid
i am really freaked out to my core like
how much of who we are as an adult is an
echo of things that happened to us when
we were a kid and look i get it like
neurologically and i'd love to hear you
taking this i i have a feeling you're a
lot more educated on it than i am but
like the
the the way that our neurology works
such that we are we are so much of a
sponge in the early days and it's a
great strategy right from a species
standpoint you've got a horse sort of
comes pre-wired with everything a human
gets a drink in culture to be shaped by
its environment but when that
environment is dysfunctional then you
get this dysfunctional adult i've heard
very credible psychologists say there
are certain things if you don't get
locked in by the age of four like good
luck unwinding that
and that that really scares me and i'd
love to know like what that process is
of beginning to change that story so
this is where sort of the central
questions of our lives overlap mine is
how do you stop someone's zip code from
being the biggest determinant of their
future success which has so much to do
with how they were raised
yeah and and this is key you know as you
mentioned the the stories that we tell
ourselves these stories are actually
functional at a very core level so
you know what do you mean by functional
well what i mean is that you know
sometimes people talk about only think
positive thoughts or only have positive
emotions okay and and actually we have
around 16 000 spoken thoughts every
single day we have many many emotional
experiences and we have many stories and
there is nothing inherently good or bad
about
any thought you know there's nothing
inherently good or bad about any emotion
these
this is basically your body doing its
job which is that your emotions evolved
to help you to
ward off danger to judge to criticize to
understand to pick apart
so when you have these difficult
thoughts emotions and stories that's
often your body your psychology doing
its job which is
basically trying to help you to be
a coherent being in the world and i'll
give you an example of what i mean by
this you know when i wake up in the
morning and i hear my baby cry
my story which is that is my child that
is crying that needs me
is what helps me to tune in that sound
relative to the washing machine that's
going on in the background
so as human beings what we do is we take
in all these stimuli we take in all this
stuff that's going on in the environment
and we make sense of it
and making sense of these stories
even if they make sense in a way that
doesn't serve us is sense making so we
all do this
what starts to happen is that
we could have grown up with a story that
might be i'm unlovable i was always told
i'm not good enough and i'm unlovable
but then you know you reach 30 or 35 or
whatever it is and
you start recognizing that that story is
stopping you from being intimate is
stopping you from actually
moving in the direction of your values
which is that you want to feel close and
collaborative and connected
and so it's
it's not that there's anything
inherently good or bad about any story
any thought or any emotion that we have
the more important question to ask
ourselves is
is the story that i have right now
serving me
can you define serving me that that's i
think something that will help people
yeah yeah is it bringing me closer to
being the person
the leader the loved one that i most
want to be
so for instance if i have a story that
says
um i'm unlovable the example that i gave
earlier
and that's actually now stopping you
from connecting with others
and it might even be impacting on your
leadership because
you are unable to give effective
feedback in a way that feels connected
or you
are really struggling with your team but
you are unable to disclose gee we we're
having a tough time together and you
feel very distant that can get in the
way
and so what's more helpful is to
recognize that our thoughts our emotions
and our stories aren't good or bad they
just are
but sometimes what we do is we hook into
them
and we start letting them drive us
and so what happens is it starts driving
the you know that's the bus and the bus
is being driven by the story as opposed
to recognizing that we are
more than our story there's so much more
that we can bring to our lives and to
any difficulty that we're facing
but when we get stuck or in emotional
agility terms the language that i use is
hooked when we get hooked by a thought
and emotional story
what it does is it often moves us away
from our values and so emotional agility
is the opposite it's the process
by which we become healthy with
ourselves
and healthy with these things inside of
us
so that we can bring other parts of
ourselves to the surface
so when i think about um
the things that you're talking about and
the process of rebuilding if you've had
a negative story it's not serving you
anymore
and you talk so profoundly about values
i think okay well one i don't know that
a lot of people define who they want to
be like what type of leader they want to
be yeah um i don't know that people know
what their values are um yeah how can
people so if if the rebuilding process
is partly recognizing okay your emotions
can serve you they're a signal right
i've always said that if if the
subconscious can process data faster and
faster as they say
then the odds are that emotions are
essentially the subconscious
communicating in a way that's far more
um it's faster it's far more visceral
than if it were just trying to kick up
words into my conscious mind and so
my job is to identify okay what is that
emotion why do i feel that emotion and
then translate it to things i know about
myself so
how do you advise people if if you think
what i'm saying makes sense how do you
advise people to
solidify that identity of who they want
to be identify what their values are so
they can know ah this feeling is out of
alignment with that like what does that
process look like
so okay so the first thing is recognize
that we live in a culture
that tells us that some emotions are bad
and what this can often mean is that we
then
are in an internal struggle with our
difficult emotions because i feel sad
and i shouldn't feel sad you know often
what i talk about in my work is that we
have these type one emotions the type
one emotion is
i'm frustrated i'm angry i'm anxious i'm
fearful i'm grieving okay that's a type
one emotion a type two emotion is the
emotion that you have about the emotion
oh
i'm anxious but i shouldn't be anxious
or you know i should be grateful about
this that's going on even though i'm not
enjoying it because many people would
want to be in my position and so what we
start doing is we start having this
internal struggle with ourselves
so
how do we start
cleaning that out how do we start really
centering on
what are my emotions telling me and how
can they serve me
the first thing that i would say is that
when you feel something
i often talk about this idea that you
know in my work i have often have people
saying to me things like you know i just
wish the stress would go away or i don't
want to feel angry i don't want to feel
disappointed
and i say to them you know i get it but
you know these kind of goals are dead
people's goals
only dead people
never get stressed never feel the
disappointment that comes with failure
never have their hearts broken you know
discomfort
is the price of admission to a
meaningful life
you don't get to
raise a family leave the world a better
place or have a meaningful career
without stress and discomfort so the
first thing that i would say is
when you feel a difficult emotion
gentle acceptance
gentle acceptance what do i mean by that
i don't mean passive resignation i don't
mean like
oh you know i feel bad this is helpless
there's no point in me even trying what
is gentle acceptance gentle acceptance
is the equivalent of
you go outside and it's raining
and you say
gee it's raining
okay
it's gee it's raining
not gentle acceptance
it's raining and why does it always rain
when i want to go outside and i wish
this rain okay so the first part of
being with our emotions is actually
gentle acceptance and this is not
something we often talk about in
a business related context because
really what i'm talking about is
self-compassion
self-compassion is often thought of as
being weak or lazy you're deluding
yourself you're lying to yourself but
it's not it's the self-soothing that you
were talking about earlier
it's that ability to
feel something
and instead of punishing yourself for
that feeling
instead being able to say
this is what i'm feeling like this is
tough you know i've had this experience
and it's tough
and when you do that you create
a space for yourself
in which you are connected and you kind
of love yourself
and it's in that space that you then
able to take more risks and try out new
things because you know that if
something goes wrong you'll be there for
you
so that's the first thing the second
thing that i would say is
once you've done gentle acceptance
understand that your emotions contain
signposts to your values
we don't feel things
about stuff that we don't care about
so
slow down
into what is this emotion that i'm
feeling
and what is the emotion telling me about
my values because we can find out about
our values in many different ways but
one of the first ways we found out about
our values is to recognize that our
emotions
are often telling us what our values are
if we just breathe into it and start
saying
what is it that this difficult emotion
might be telling me
it might be i need more support right
now it might be that i'm exhausted and i
need more self-care
but these are really important parts of
starting to connect with our values when
you had your clinical practice did you
find that people um
there was a question you could ask them
that would help them figure out how to
translate that because
i've met a lot of people who they can
identify i feel bored but they have a
hard time going and this translates into
i have a value around this like are
there simple questions and things that
people can ask them or do you have them
journal
well so most of the work that i actually
do is with leaders in organizational
context and um there are a couple of
questions the first is
what is the emotion and what is the
emotion telling you you might care about
and i want to come back to that because
often the emotion we say we feel isn't
the emotion we're really feeling and how
do people get to that ultimate truth
thing we can start saying
what is it that i did today that was
worthwhile
okay
not what did i enjoy
because you can go to a party and you
can get drunk and you can enjoy it it's
not the same as
worthwhile what did i do today that was
worthwhile often when we answer the
question
you start connecting with
it was learning or it was connection or
it was i had that really difficult
conversation with that person
but i felt that
there was a sense of both of us being
together at the end of it and so asking
ourselves over a couple of days you know
what is this emotion that i'm feeling
what is it signaling
what did i do today that was worthwhile
um what
if i was to choose a day
that
i was designing for myself what would be
some of the things that i would do and
it might be things that are around
creativity you know the stuff that we
close ourselves off from but that starts
signaling our values i've also got a
quiz that a lot of people use that have
got a whole lot of values kind of mapped
out in it that i can share with you but
they're different ways of starting to
explore what our values are and
um
this is really important because
the world around us
is constantly telling us what our values
should be
it might be to drive a particular car or
to have a particular kind of career
and so being able to connect with the
heartbeat of our own why
who we want to be
our internal compass
is really important not just because it
feels good
but it also protects us from this kind
of social contagion where we know we can
start almost living someone else's life
and then you turn around 20 years later
and you're like oh my god like i've
built this thing but i don't want it
so values help to protect us from social
contagion but we also know that they are
incredibly important for our mental
health and well-being and knowing
who you are and what you stand for
is also protective of um burnout
and
we got to talk about that quiz then
because you you've pointed out something
that is a terrifying statistic which is
that depression now
causes more absence or um oh god i
forget the exact phrase but more than
cancer time away from work oh god what
was the exact step
so
you know the world health organization
really points to this statistic which is
now widely accepted which is that
depression
is now the leading cause of disability
globally
that's crazy
outstripping cancer outstripping heart
disease
and so you know really we are coming
into an age it's an age where there is
incredible complexity where
technology has really outstripped our
capacity psychologically
to
thrive and so more and more these skills
of being able to be with oneself in ways
that are healthy
in ways that are emotionally agile these
are fundamental skills for ourselves our
families our children you know because
what happens is
if you think about in organizations all
organizations say oh we've got to be
agile we've got to be creative we've got
to be innovative
but in reality when people are faced
with
huge amounts of information and
complexity they tend to do the opposite
they shut down there's black and white
thinking there's huge amounts of
rigidity
and emotional agility is
the skill that is critical because you
don't get agility and flexibility in
innovation
without
opening yourself up to difficult
emotions that might come with
innovation you know the flip side of
that is
the innovation doesn't work
or success the flip side of that is
failure
so
you know there is a fragility that is
interwoven
in life
we are healthy until we are not we are
successful in our work until we are not
and so
these skills that i'm talking about are
the skills that help us to deal with the
world as it is not as we wish it to be
in some pollyanna reality you know in
pollyanna fiction of just be positive
and this
singular dimension of success it's about
being able to be healthy with ourselves
what are some specifics from the quiz
because i i want like i'm so intrigued
by how you help people map their value
system um i'd love to know and i'm sure
we can link to it as well so people can
really get into it but at like just a
quick sort of nutshell version what is a
quiz walking people through
sure so what the quiz basically does is
it takes people through questions around
whether they push their emotions aside
whether they're agile with their
emotions what some of their core values
are and some of the skills that can be
developed so let me give you a practical
example of how we can be with our
emotions more effectively and how they
can start signaling our values
imagine you come home from work and
someone says to you how was your day
and
what do we often do we often use these
very big labels to describe how we're
feeling so
i'm stressed is the most common one i
hear
um i'm stressed you know every day it's
like just a bit stressful
but there's a world of difference
between stress and disappointment
or stress and that like knowing feeling
of i'm in the wrong job or the wrong
career
so what i found in my work is that when
we do something that's actually fairly
simple which is to move beyond this big
label of unstressed
and instead we go into
one or two other emotions that we might
be feeling
this psychologically is called emotion
granularity it's becoming more granular
with our difficult emotions
it's an incredible experience to do this
so you go from i'm stressed into
i'm disappointed
or i'm exhausted
and what we know psychologically is when
we label our emotions in a more granular
way
it immediately helps us to identify what
the cause of the emotion is
and helps us to start taking active
steps
so i'm stressed
i'm feeling
like i need more support here you know i
feel unsupported might be really what's
going on and that starts to put you in
the place of
how can i get more support
or
you know moving away from i'm stressed
into actually i think i'm in the wrong
job
or what it starts to do is it starts to
develop out what is called the readiness
potential in our brains it's this part
of our brains
it starts moving us from the space of
being in our heads into being in action
in our bodies
and so you start getting your resume
together you start getting your cv
together we know that this emotion
granularity is critical to our
well-being in fact children
aged two three four years old who are
more able to accurately label their
emotions
they're longitudinal studies showing
that over time those children land up
doing better because you can imagine a
16 year old who can't label his or her
emotions and someone says oh i've got a
great idea let's go let the air out of
the school principal's tires
okay
and that kid wants to be part of the
group
so a child who is more able to
accurately label their emotions is a
child who says
i want to be part of the group but i
have a sense of disquiet about what's
going on here
you know maybe this isn't the right
action
so we know that just the simple
way of being which is to move beyond big
emotions
and to be more granular with them is
extraordinarily powerful
in fact i had a client i was working
with in an organization who always used
to say
um everyone's angry you know he was
angry his wife was angry his team was
angry with him
and we started working on this you know
what are two other options what are two
other things that the team might be
feeling
that are not about anger it's about
something else
and he started to say
maybe it's that they don't trust me yet
or maybe what's going on
is that they feel
a bit overwhelmed here
and you can see that when you go into a
meeting with other teams angry
versus
they need more trust
it's a completely different conversation
it's a completely different way of being
and months later this guy's wife said to
me that it completely changed their
relationship because he would say oh it
looks like you angry with me and she was
like
i'm not angry
i'm just tired
oh you know i'm not angry i i just want
to be seen more
and so labeling emotions can completely
shift things there are other practical
strategies i can give as well but tell
me if you fill this up i would love to
go into more but first i want to talk
about that idea of the emotional
granularity i think that's hugely
important and once you have the language
for something all of a sudden you do
start to begin to differentiate between
things and i'll say one of the biggest
breakthroughs in my own marriage is very
similar to what you were just talking
about which was the ability to
articulate in the moment what i'm
feeling and maybe even more importantly
why i'm feeling it and so my wife and i
say don't argue about the t right we
were always at the surface level about
what the argument was and once we
realized okay wait a second like when
you can get into that granularity of
this is actually unease it's not anger
or this is you're triggering my
insecurity and now let me why am i
feeling insecure about this is it's
surprising even to me and you know then
you begin to sort of dig under that and
find it but if you don't have the words
for it if you don't know what sort of
that array of options is to be able to
choose the one that fits just right
you stay in that you know to every
problem to a hammer every problem is a
nail scenario yes yes and this is where
even starting to connect with um what it
feels like in our body because again we
so often live our lives you know here in
our heads
and when we live our lives in our heads
you know really our wisdom and our
compassion and our courage and our being
our authenticity like all of the things
that make us thriving human beings
are often not the things in our heads
you know our minds will walk us off a
cliff our minds will
you know our minds will persuade us that
we are right and another person is wrong
even if it means destroying a
relationship you know even if it means
not speaking to a person because i'm
right and they are wrong and i can't
remember exactly what this person did
all i know is i haven't spoken to them
since our minds will walk us off a cliff
and
really as human beings being effective
is often about moving away from our
heads into our hearts
okay i've heard you say that before i'm
going to pin you down on that one so
what is it what does that mean like to
be in my head i understand to be in my
heart
what it means is being in our ability to
breathe
to be centered in ourselves and are you
talking about the victor frankel space
that i've heard you mentioned before can
you say to breathe
yeah it is that i mean you know what is
viktor frankl who survived the nazi
death camps describes this idea between
stimulus and response there is a space
and in that space is our power to choose
and it's in that choice that lies our
growth and our freedom
when we are hooked when we are
emotionally inagile there's no space
between stimulus and response you know
he started in on the finances i left the
room um i'm being undermined i'm gonna
shut down
okay so there's no space between
stimulus and response
what are we doing to create the space
what we need to be doing is firstly do
away with this idea that some emotions
are loud some are not allowed
i feel what i feel gentle acceptance
secondly recognize that our emotions are
data
but they are not directives okay
so we want to be able to observe our
emotions
not
get
stuck in them but also not push them
aside we want to be able to observe them
wisely another way that we can start
just
generating that data not directives
space between stimulus and response
is to simply notice our thoughts our
feelings and our stories
for what they are
they are thoughts their feelings their
stories what do i mean by this if we can
instead of saying i am sad
we start to say
i'm noticing that i'm feeling sad
i'm noticing
this is my
there's no point
thought
i'm noticing that this is my i'm not
good enough story what you're starting
to do is you're starting to notice your
thoughts your emotions and your stories
for what they are
their thoughts their emotions their
stories they're not facts
they're not
scripts that you have to live into so
when people begin to notice that when
they recognize their story do you teach
them to rewrite that story
well what we often wanted to do is we
wanted to say this is my story
and
who do i want to be right now
so you know for example this idea of
getting hooked on the story of i am
right
we've all had that experience okay human
beings love being right so i'm right and
are wrong and we've we all know this you
know we all know that when you've been
in a relationship for any period of time
you can have a fight with someone
and finally the water's calm
and you get into bed and you turn out
the light
and then something compels you
one last time to turn on the light again
and tell the person
why you are right and they are wrong and
all hull breaks loose again
you know wars are made and countries are
devastated by people being hooked on the
idea of being right
and so
think about this you know the more
important question for all of us
is
i may be right
but is this story serving me
you know i may be right
but is the serving who i want to be in
my relationship
that you i've heard you mentioned that
before i think it's so powerful talk
about the the gods of right
which i thought was just a fascinating
way for people to just carry it out to
its logical conclusion and see what
happens i mean it's this you know it's
this idea that if the gods of wright
came down and said
i give it to you
you are right
you are right you
are right
you still get to choose
who do you want to be
and
you know what's powerful with this is
that
it means that you can operate in a space
that that you know we can call bothness
okay bothness and what do i mean by this
which is
you can be cross with your husband or
your wife
and you may even be right
but
your love that you feel for the person
and
the value that you place in that
relationship
can lead you to simultaneously be right
and to reach out to the person and give
them a hug
you can hear from my accent i didn't
grow up in the us i grew up as a white
south african in apartheid south africa
and it was a country and a community
committed to not seeing basically to not
seeing the other to not seeing in in
south africa there's this beautiful word
sawobona
um
you hear it if you go to south africa
it's a greeting you hear on the streets
every single day it's sauerbona yellow
saubona and it's basically just hello
it's hello in zulu
but when you translate sabobona
sauerbona literally translated means i
see you and by seeing you i bring you
into being
and so much of my work is really focused
on this metaphor this idea of what does
it take in the way we see ourselves
our thoughts our emotions and our
stories
that help us to thrive in a fragile and
complex world
and that also
it's only when we are more able to see
ourselves
that we are more able to see others too
because you know when we aren't
clean with ourselves
when we aren't connected with how we
feeling and with what's going on
we snap at people we judgey
we tense we we disconnected
but when we see ourselves we are more
able to see others too
yeah that is that notion of bringing
somebody into existence by seeing them i
don't know if you saw the movie avatar
and i certainly do not mean in any way
shape or form to cheapen what you're
talking about but
that that always hit me really hard like
i see you and i say that to my employees
sometimes like i see you in an avatar
way like i i
i'm not praising you because i'm blind
to your faults i see the totality of who
you are and i'm still moved to this this
comment this relationship you know
however you want to think about it and
i've always thought that that is so
powerful and there is like when you
think about what happens to a human when
you put them in solitary confinement and
this sort of mental illness that ends up
being born of that which is crazy like
to think that just being alone is enough
to make you feel like you don't exist so
i really get that sense of like by
seeing you there's there's like a
reflection back to you that really does
solidify your entire being it's it's
pretty crazy it's so it's so profound
you know our human beings have a couple
of core needs
um
we all
have a need for belonging and you see
this
you see this at age two you know it's
like
jack wouldn't play with me
i feel you know left out so we have a
need for belonging and this icu
is saying you know you belong there's
space for you and i think doing it for
other people as a leader and in a
relationship is so powerful you know
what do we often do we often do the
opposite of it
someone comes home from work and we
barely put down our phones
to say hello to this person that we're
sharing a life with
or you know
what would it ex be the experience for
our children
to feel that they are really see it's so
powerful and then also
how do we see ourselves
yeah i love that there there's something
about how even-handed you are with
blending the head the heart the science
um all of it bringing it together what
you you talked about earlier the tyranny
of positivity which i think is
too just like such a brilliant
juxtaposition of words to get people to
understand that um
if you were just saying hey if you're
sad then be sad i i wouldn't resonate
with that if it's you're sad
accept it that's where we are that is
the state of things but now you can in
not fighting that you don't get that
second order emotion of feeling badly
about that that you don't fall prey to
the social contagion of you're not
supposed to feel that way but you're not
encouraging people to just sit and
wallow in it it's about recognizing this
is now i'm using my own language but
this is the subconscious communicating
to you now what you make of that is
going to determine the trajectory of
your life right you've been you've been
really elucidating in a powerful way
what shakespeare says in that quote
which is nothing is either good or bad
but thinking makes it so right so the
way that you're perceiving your life the
way that you're thinking about it is
really going to determine the quality of
your life and i think it's it is so
extraordinary that you have got this
system for people to recognize where
they're at not beat themselves up over
it but understand that
they
and again i'm using my own words i'll be
curious to see how you respond to this
but
that your emotions aren't necessarily
true you know what happens when we have
difficult emotions is that often what we
do is we bottle them we push them aside
and bottling emotions is associated with
lower levels of well-being but also
lower likelihood of achieving your goals
but on the other hand we could brood on
our emotions
getting so stuck in them
that
we treat them as fact and that we're so
immersed in them
that
we we aren't actually living our lives
we just kind of living in our heads
and so bottling and brooding they look
very different but both are associated
with poorer outcomes and so what is this
you know effective third way look like
it's about being curious it's about
being compassionate with ourselves
it's about being courageous because
sometimes we face into emotions
that are difficult you know sometimes we
might be facing into an emotion
that tells us that
a relationship isn't working out
or that
a business that you'd put
years into
actually has
zero likelihood of success
and that you could put another five
years into it because you just want to
go go go
but that actually
you know there's a time
to grit
and i know this is something you talk
about a lot there's a time to grit
and that grittiness is powerful
when it's values connected when there's
an opportunity of success
when it's aligned with who you want to
be
but sometimes as human beings we need to
know when to grit
and when to quit dude i think that's
really interesting and this is something
i'm glad you brought up again you
mentioned earlier single dimensional
success and i'd love to know how do you
define multi-dimensional success like
what are the dimensions people should
really be paying attention to you know
often when we talk about success people
imagine that success is
you know financial metrics
and to me i think about success in a
very different way i'm thinking about
success being you know are you living a
life that feels concordant with your
values
you know that's fundamentally and again
this is the conversation between you and
the person in the mirror
and
you know those values might be values
that are you know i want to live in a
nice house or
then that's something that you've
identified it's intentional it's
connected with who you are and that's
you know
that's your value
um
but but you know we tend not to have
just one value we tend to have many
different values and so sometimes people
might say things like oh my values are
in conflict you know i value
having a
great career but i also value my family
and these values on conflict
and you know i think about this is very
differently uh
i see values as
they just are
you know your values are your values
values often have this idea of being
very abstract you know they're these
things written on walls and businesses
and but i think of values as qualities
of action
and what i mean by that is every single
day
you get hundreds of opportunities to
either move towards your values or away
from your values you get a choice point
you know when you when you go into your
kitchen you get a choice point of do i
take the muffin or do i take the fruit
one might bring you towards your values
one might take you away from your values
um
so often when we think about values it's
this abstract idea but i think about
values as qualities of action that every
single day we have hundreds of
opportunities
and it's actually very rare that values
are in conflict your values just are you
know they just
they just are they they they the things
you care about they life directions
so what is often in conflict what's
often in conflict is not your values per
se it's your goals okay your goals are
in conflict there's a difference a value
is a life direction
a goal is often something that is
very explicit it's circumscribed it's
time limited so you know i might value
my career and value my family as an
example
but my goal
of
giving a a talk
in australia
at the same time that my son has a
really important you know competition at
school
it's those two goals that are in
conflict it's not my values they're my
goals
and this is really powerful because this
allows us to move
out of the space of internal conflict or
what's more important you know is it my
family or is it my career well it's both
it's both and it can be both
so what it allows me to do is to say
it's the specifics of my goals that are
in conflict
how can i you know recognize that
actually
giving that talk in australia is also
earning an income and allowing me to do
something that supports other aspects of
my life including my children
um but how can i be in australia and
connect with my son in a way that's
meaningful because now i've moved away
from this internal like oh my goodness
my values are in conflict and i've moved
more into the space of there's this goal
versus that goal
as much as i want to pretend i am i'm
not omnipresent and omnipotent i need to
choose
and it removes so much of the conflict
and the difficulty that i think so often
is part and parcel of you know when we
think about goal goals and values and
what's more important and it allows me
to be in a space and all of us to be in
a space where we can say
okay
both of these things are my values so
how can i be in one place and create a
meaningful connection
with this person
dude that that's an amazing breakdown i
love that and to sort of
bring this all together i i've often
said to people
look the you talk about that single
dimension of success people often define
as financial i can just hey i'll give
you the punch line it isn't the point of
life is definitely not uh money it's not
fame it's not notoriety anything like
that the the punch line of life is how
you feel about yourself when you're by
yourself and your entire world all of
your work is about that internal life
and i think that that is so incredible
like if i was going to put my finger on
one thing that people need to put their
time and energy into it's that it is
literally getting
um it's funny when i go to use certain
words i'm like i'm not sure how she'll
feel about this but getting control uh
of your internal life like making sure
that you're telling yourself a story
about yourself that moves you towards
your goals and i hear us you know saying
a lot of the same things i think it's
it's so useful i'm so glad that you've
taken the time to write this stuff down
to put it out there the ted talk is
incredible your interviews are
incredible um
what is the impact that you want to have
on the world
the impact that i would want to have in
the world is
to help people to
to be
and you know really what i mean by that
is
we live in a life that would have us
believe we are in a never ending iron
man or iron woman competition
we just need to keep going and going and
going and going and punishing ourselves
and beating ourselves up and exhausting
ourselves
and i think the power in in just
being kind to ourselves and
in that space of kindness you know
kindness to the self is often again
thought of as being weak or lazy but
it's not it's in that space of kindness
is where you think huh maybe i'll try
this or maybe i can take this risk
and so you just have this incredible
way of um creating
psychological safety within the self and
so i think you know
i i think about my father
and i think about um
when i was little before my father died
before he was even diagnosed with cancer
i was about five years old
and i developed a fear of death you you
can imagine i'm a fun person to be
around
but but you know
kids at around five years old start
becoming aware of their own mortality
and so i was about five years old and i
remember being petrified that
my parents were gonna die
and i would call my dad at night and i
would say to him promise me you're never
gonna die promise me you're never gonna
die and i would find my way into my
parents bed
night after night after night
and
my father
would comfort me
he would comfort me with soft pets he
would kiss me
and then he would say to me we all die
susie
it's normal to be scared
and what i understood and this is i
think the impact that i would like to
make what i understood
in what he was saying to me through
those
dark nights is that
courage
for all of us as human beings is not the
absence of fear
courage is not about like never feeling
fearful or never failing or never
feeling anxious or grief courage is not
the absence of fear
we live
a life
in which
the beauty of our life
is interwoven with its fragility
we don't get to love
without knowing that one day we will
grieve we just don't get it
we don't get to be healthy without
knowing that one day we will lose that
health
and so this interwoveness what it means
is that as human beings
we need to become more comfortable with
not just the so-called positive emotions
of happiness
but also we need to develop skills to
deal with the world as it is which is
fragile
and so to come full circle is you know
my father would say to me courage um you
know it's normal to be scared
it's normal to be scared we all die and
what i understood he was teaching me is
that courage is not the absence of fear
courage is fear walking
courage is about feeling your emotions
not pushing them aside
trying to do away with them
or rationalizing why you shouldn't feel
them courage is about feeling them with
compassion
with curiosity
and then even if it is uncomfortable
taking steps towards things that are of
value to you
uncomfortable because
starting a new business is tough
sometimes
reaching for your dreams
brings difficulty and this is why we
need courage so what is the impact that
i would like to have very long-winded
answer but it is about
helping people to be
to be with
themselves
in compassion
in curiosity what's going on for me why
am i feeling this
and encourage what do i need to do here
even if it's difficult and i think if i
could do one of those things
in any small way and even a small
percentage i would feel like i've made
an impact
it's amazing i love that well tell
people where they can connect with you
and you can help them along on that
journey
so absolutely so the first is a ted i've
got two collaborations with ted the
first is my ted talk the gift and power
of emotional courage uh the second is a
podcast that i've just started with ted
called checking in which is
bullet bite size you know 20 minutes
and that's been amazing um the quiz we
mentioned earlier susan david.com
forward slash learn and then of course
my book emotional agility awesome well
guys definitely check all that stuff out
i'm sure you got a taste of it here but
she has an amazing way to get into the
internal state of people and help them
make changes there which will i promise
you they will have an impact throughout
everything in your life there's nothing
more important than getting a hold of
what's going on inside your mind and
speaking of getting a hold of things
inside your mind if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe and until next time
my friends be legendary take care
people who are more physically active
are happier they have better
relationships they have more meaning in
life they're less at risk for things
like depression and loneliness if you go
further than just sort of that kind of
epidemiology and you look at how
movement affects the brain